CSCB58 Project File: Winter 2018

Team Member A
-------------
First Name: Joe
Last Name: Armitage
Student Number: 999030141
UofT E-mail Address: joe.armitage@mail.utoronto.ca

Team Member B
-------------
First Name: Robert
Last Name: Augustynowicz
Student Number: 1003511078
UofT E-mail Address: robert.augustynowicz@mail.utoronto.ca

Team Member C 
-------------
First Name: Dax
Last Name: Patel
Student Number: 1003587040
UofT E-mail Address: dax.patel@mail.utoronto.ca

Team Member D 
-------------
First Name: Rahul
Last Name: Gupta
Student Number: 1002353589
UofT E-mail Address: ra.gupta@mail.utoronto.ca


Project Details
---------------
Project Title: 
    Notepad-- 

Project Description: 
    An Application-Specific Integrated Circuit implementation of a rudimentary text-editor,
    without persistence, for use with a PS/2 keyboard and VGA monitor.

Video URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FKi2u_n1GeI

Code URL (please upload a copy of this file to your repository at the end of the project as well, 
it will serve as a useful resource for future development): 
    https://github.com/armitag8/ASIC_Notepad--
    Note: all code in production in src/com; deprecated, reference & test code in src/ext
 


Proposal
--------

What do you plan to have completed by the end of the first lab session?:
    The ASIC will have the ability to print simple characters (A-Z, 0-9) through the VGA in 
    arbitrary positions using switches on the DE2 as input. Each character will fill the same 
    dimensions, with kerning, spacing and vertical alignment encoded. The position and colour 
    of each character is selected with the DE/2's switches.

What do you plan to have completed by the end of the second lab session?:
    The ASIC  will now accept individual characters with no position information and print them
    through the VGA to the next available position, beginning from the top-left corner, and 
    proceeding in normal Latin left-to-right then top-to-bottom order. Additionally, instead of
    taking input from the DE2 switches, the ASIC will now take input from a keyboard connected 
    via the DE2's PS/2 port and the colour will be set to a default value (green for retro look).

What do you plan to have completed by the end of the third lab session?:
    The ASIC will now be capable of overwriting previous characters displayed on the screen, using
    the Backspace key, as well as posess carriage return / line feed functionality. Time-
    dependant, additional features that could be included are:
        - A flashing cursor to enable overwriting at the selected position (navigation 
            with arrow keys, home, end)
        - Rudimentary line-copy and line-paste
        - The ability to write special characters, such braces, brackets, colons, etc.
        - ^The same, with lowercase letters
        - Multiple 'pages', scrolling

What is your backup plan if things don’t work out as planned?
    As this project has many features that are not necessary for a 
    rudimentary text editor, each can be omitted, if time is overly 
    constrained.

What hardware will you need beyond the DE2 board 
    In addition to a display with VGA input, a keyboard with PS/2 
    output is required for this project.


Motivations
-----------
How does this project relate to the material covered in CSCB58?:
    This project will make use of a RAM module to keep the location and value of characters
    written on the VGA monitor. An adder will be needed in order to calulate successive positions
    for each character to be written as well as each pixel within each character. Also a 
    decoder module will be needed in order translate input from the keyboard. Some counters will
    be needed to maintain the current character position and pixel position within that character.
    Finally the process of reading, then writing, or overwriting will be controlled 
    by a finite state machine.

Why is this project interesting/cool (for CSCB58 students, and for non CSCB58 students?):
    For Students of this course the interesting part of this project is not its actual function,
    but the ideas in the process needed to make this project; to be able to diplay keyboard
    input in a legible way and then to control the display and data in a user-friendly manner
    is quite a challenge and rewarding, too.

    For students who are not in this course this project could be viewed as a simple teleprompter 
    or instant messaging device (2 required). Alternatively, it could become quite useful in 
    combination with a microcontroller and/or persistance (each to be built by future B58 students, 
    one day) as a stand-alone assembly IDE. We dream that this setup may become the standard way 
    that B58 students practise writing assembly. 

Why did you personally choose this project?:
    For us, as computer science students, the choice of text editor can devolve into an 'unholy
    war' (see vim vs. emacs). Although we sincerely doubt that an hardware implementation of any
    such software would be superior in any appreciable regard, we don't doubt that this project
    is more useful than the butterfly effect: https://xkcd.com/378/
    
    When browsing prior projects for inspiration, we found that the vast majority were games and
    gimmics. Ideas that stood out in this regard were: a fellow student was considering building
    a whole CPU, and one group last year built a layered keyboard. These projects captured our
    imagination because they allowed for continued development and integration into larger systems
    with real applicability. This kind of modularity and portability excited us, as computer
    scientists. Perhaps in future years our project will be built upon to make games, IDEs, 
    publishing machines, communication systems, or something so cool that we can't imagine it yet.


Attributions
------------

Quick Reference:
    The following modules contain soley work from referenced sources:
        - vga_*
        - keyboard.v
        - pages_RAM.*
        - keyboardRawData.v
        - hex_display.v
        - black.mif

    The following modules contain some work from referenced sources:
        - key2ascii.v
        - black_320.mif
        - black_640.mif

0. Pin Assignments:
    We made use of the DE2.qsf file to assign all pins on the DE/2 board to useful names.
    http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~bharrington/cscb58/labs/de2.qsf
    Usage permisision: educational purposes clause of Intel Programmable Solutions Group EULA.
    Copyright 2018 Altera University Program

1. Top-level Module:
    Our design pattern and much inspiration was drawn from Steve Engels' Labs 00-06 (esp. Lab06)
    http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~bharrington/cscb58/labs.shtml
    Usage permission as CSCB58 students
    Copyright 2018 University of Toronto

2. VGA Adapter Module:
    We directly used the VGA adapter downloaded from:
    http://www.utsc.utoronto.ca/~bharrington/cscb58/labs/lab6-part2.zip
    Free usage permisision under Creative Commons License
    Copyright 2006 Sam Vafaee, Copyright 2007 Tomasz S. Czajkowski
    

3. Font:
    We based our font on the basis33 font downloaded from:
    http://dl.1001fonts.com/basis33.zip
    Free usage permission under MIT License
    Copyright 2004, 2005 Tristan Gammer, Copyright 2014 Manchson
    
4. Keyboard module (first):
    We read, referenced, tested and eventualy rejected the keyboard module from:
    http://students.iitk.ac.in/eclub/assets/tutorials/keyboard.pdf
    We were unable to find usage permissions for this work. We will not use it.

5. Keyboard Module (second):
    We directly integrated the entirety of the keyboard.v, key2ascii and ps2_rx.v modules from:
    https://github.com/jconenna/FPGA-Projects/tree/master/Keyboard_Interface
    We obtained usage permission directly from the author, Joey Conenna, vi email,
    dated March 14, 2018 between joe@armitage.com and embeddedthoughtsblog@gmail.com

6. RAM Module:
    We generated a RAM module (pages_RAM.v and pages_RAM.qip) using the Quartus Wizard
    This design IP is under a free license from Intel/Altera, but was not integrated.



Updates
-------

    Week 1
    ------
        - We successfully printed [A-Z] and [0-9] to arbitrary positions through the VGA.

        - We encountered an issue when attempting to output at standard VGA resolution 640x480:
            The VGA adapter provided for Lab06 has a maximum output resolution of 320x240, 
            so we may constrain editor to print a maximum of 40 characters width, unless we
            can find an alternative VGA module.
            
        - We had extra time and resources, so we began the keyboard input driver, too. 
            We obtained a de-serializing module from IITK (keyboardRawData.v) and built a 
            decoder for the scan codes it produces (keyboard_decoder.v). It currently accepts 
            individual presses only (no shift-A, for example) and works with our display hardware.
            
        - After some failed attempts then research (unfortunate order), we discovered the 
            difficulty of handling serialized data from the keyboard and in adapting the module we
            had obtained to output distinct codes for simultaneous presses of shift and other 
            keys. Instead, we found a new keyboard decoder module that had this behavior 
            built-in. We then tested and integrated that.
            
    Week 2
    ------
        - When we replaced the keyboard module with another, more advanced module (keyboard.v
            and ps2_rx.v), it came with a decoder (key2ascii.v) that converts scan codes to ASCII
            which was identical to the half-completed (upper-case only) one that we had already 
            built (keyboard_decoder.v). It seemed silly to repeat the monkey-work of looking up 
            (or producing with keyboard and reading from hex as we did) scan codes that we had yet
            to add to our decoder (some special characters), so we began using the provided 
            decoder. We now have added to it the necessary control characters we will need for our
            next phase (cursor movement, overwriting).
            
        - We successfully implemented automatic character positioning and user-controlled line 
            feed. We encountered a bug in the instantiation of the additional connections of the 
            datapath and the FSM where the increment_pixel_counter signal was being sent to the 
            increment_x_position_counter input, causing the characters to be spread across the 
            line. This set us back some time.
        
        - We added lowercase letters and special characters available on standard US layout 
            keyboards. This required both the creation of additional bitmaps (in char_decoder.v)
            and the updates to key2ascii.v mentioned above.
            
        - We built RAM... (attrib, too)
    
    Week 3
    ------
        - We expanded the control FSM significantly (dozens more states) to handle the input of 
            control characters. Our editor can now edit text. It responds to arrow keys, home,
            end, and enter (this was redone for consistency with new logic). The backspace and
            delete functions were built, but the addition of a temporary register necessary to
            store and print a space, even though a different character was pressed, caused 
            undefined behavior (Random lights on DE2, no VGA output, etc.)
        
        - We added a flashing cursor that indicates the current character position, using a 
            rate divider and similar printing logic to the (printable) characters. However, we 
            could not iron out all of the bugs int the allotted lab time and were unable to find
            space in any of the other lab sessions.
        
        - Given our significant difficulties in this final week, we will not be implementing
            multiple pages, scrolling, or making use of the RAM module in any such way. :(
            We hope to fix basic text editing functions and a cursor in the Makerspace on 
            Monday, before the presentation Tuesday.
            
